The array and ArrayList in Java are two different ways of storing and manipulating collections of data without the need for individual variables for each element. While they may perform similar functions in a program, they are very different in their implementation and features.

One of the biggest differences is how memory is allocated for an array and an ArrayList. The standard array is of a fixed size that cannot be changed at runtime. For example, when creating this array, int[] myArray = new int[10]; the length, or amount of values that can be stored, will only ever be ten integers. You may not need all ten places, but you cannot ever have eleven. When an array is initialized with a certain amount of memory but not all places are used, this is called a partially filled array. This makes keeping track of your important values more difficult and requires a companion variable. The companion variable is an additional value that is incremented or decremented based on which array values are important. Another important feature of an array is that the name of the array, in this case it is myArray, does not hold any values. It is a reference to the memory location where the data is stored. If we were to assign yourArray = myArray, both would be pointing to the same data because they share the same memory address.

In contrast, the ArrayList is a class from the List interface, which allows for many helpful features that are not available with standard arrays. The ArrayList is what is called a generic class, which means when you declare a new ArrayList, for example, ArrayList<integer> myArrayList = new ArrayList<integer>(); you can replace <integer> with any other class, but cannot use the Java primitive data types. Because of the additional features such as .add() and .remove(), the ArrayList can only be used with class types. What really sets an ArrayList apart is that is has dynamic memory allocation. The size is not fixed and can change at runtime. The .add() and .remove() I already mentioned allow you to insert and remove values from any index in the ArrayList, and the memory and dynamic indexing adjusts automatically. This may cause the ArrayList to be a little slower than a standard array, but when you are manipulating the data frequently, the ArrayList is a much better and safer way to go.</integer></integer></integer>
